---
layout:     post
title:      Schema validation for my Emacs configuration
date:       2016-09-17
summary:    How I use `validate-setq` to ensure a proper setup.
categories: emacs
---

Maintaining an ever-growing Emacs configuration is both fun and exhausting. It
is easy to forget why I picked *that* value for a variable or how in the name of
Elisp that weird snippet ended up in my init.el. The more packages I install to
extend my beloved text editor, the harder it is to keep track of all the changes
the prolific authors put out every day.

Artur Malabarba must understand my frustration pretty well, or at least that was
my first reaction to his
recent [validate](https://github.com/Malabarba/validate.el) library.

The library has a pretty neat API, which I am sure will turn out to come in
handy for all the Elisp developers out there. However, so far I have been
focusing on the `validate-setq` macro only. `validate-setq` adds validation to
the regular `setq`, making it super-easy to catch mistakes that can be
surprisingly hard to find.

An example:

``` emacs-lisp
(use-package nrepl-client               ; Client for Clojure nREPL
  :ensure cider
  :defer t
  :config (validate-setq nrepl-hide-special-buffers 'yes))
```

If I evaluate this expression, I get a clear error message:

    Error (use-package): nrepl-client :config: Looking for ‘(boolean)’ in
    ‘yes’ failed because: not a boolean

I was setting a lot of variables before the related package was required. I also
found settings for variables that do not exist any more. Why Emacs was not
catching these errors upon loading is still an ongoing investigation.

`validate` is available on GNU ELPA. Do not miss it.
