---
layout:     post
title:      Inspecting log files with Emacs
date:       2017-11-11
summary:    How to work efficiently with local and remote log files.
categories: emacs
---

As a software developer, I cannot avoid log files. Application servers and LAMP
machines are always around the corner waiting for me, so I must accept log files
and do my best.

There are two kinds of log files I work with:

- static: the server wrote the content and never touched the file again
- dynamic: the server keeps appending content as the monitored process continues

The log files could be on my hard disk or located on a remote machine. During my
workflow, a “remote machine” can also be a Docker container.

I leave the math to you, but it should be clear that different combinations
arise. Luckily, with Emacs everything goes smoothly and I can move seamlessly
across any scenario.

When it comes to static files there are no surprises. If the log file is local,
inspecting it with `counsel-grep-or-swiper` is pretty much all I need. Since
I rarely need to modify a log file, I usually enable `read-only-mode` with
<kbd>C-x C-q</kbd> to prevent accidental edits. For a remote static file, the
same easily applies thanks to TRAMP.

Things get more interesting with dynamic logs. On local files, with
`auto-revert-mode` I can see the changes in the buffer as soon as the underlying
file changes. If I want something fancier, `auto-revert-tail-mode` behaves like
the good old `tail -f`. Dynamic remote logs, however, require a different
approach. Activating `auto-revert-mode` is not enough, I also need to set
`auto-revert-remote-files` to `t` for the desired behaviour.

What if years of `tail -f` made you totally indifferent to such niceties?  You
can follow [Michael Albinus
suggestion](https://emacs.stackexchange.com/a/15213/5514) and use
`dired-do-shell-command` in Dired.

Actually, you can even improve a little on his tip. Leave the ending `&` out,
and go straight with `dired-do-async-shell-command` which in Dired is aptly
bound to <kbd>&</kbd>. Refer to the manual for further details: [Shell Commands
in
Dired](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Shell-Commands-in-Dired.html).
