---
layout:     post
title:      Magit, the one and only
date:       2017-11-09
summary:    Understanding Git with Emacs.
categories: emacs
---

Nowadays it is basically impossible to land in a group of Emacs enthusiasts
without someone talking rapturously about the wonders of
[Magit](https://github.com/magit/magit). If you listen closely, the words
resemble a chant: *“You wish you could do it with Git, until you experience the
great Magit.”*

Be warned: the following story goes along those *magic* lines.

Magit makes me look back at my experiences with CVS, SVN and Mercurial and laugh
about my clumsiness with tools like Tortoise. Before Magit, I touched the
regular Git command-line interface for simple tasks such as cloning a
repository, always scared away by the large number of options at my
disposal. I had to deal with Eclipse’s own Git client when I was working with
Java, but please let me spare you the gruesome details.

Magit has never been so necessary and useful as it has been since I started my
new job back in April. Git is our only version-control sytem, and the
command-line is still the preferred tool in the office. Not for me,
though. Magit has become a natural extension of pretty much all of my coding.

I regularly create branches, being it for an issue to fix or a new feature to
implement. If the project is based on
[gitflow](http://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/), we are
covered in Magit thanks to
[magit-gitflow](https://github.com/jtatarik/magit-gitflow). Otherwise, rebasing
and merging on master are just a few key bindings away.

Although impressive, it is not only a matter of speed. Magit taught me more
about Git than every tutorial out in the wild. Especially when it comes to
rebasing and cherry-picking, both of which are hard to get wrong now. Rewording
a commit, exploring the repository history, dealing with submodules: it all
makes sense through an interface that could not be more helpful.

The one thing *against* Magit I have for the haters is this:

``` emacs-lisp
(unbind-key "C-c C-w" git-commit-mode-map)
```

That binding is my prefix for
[Eyebrowse](https://manuel-uberti.github.io/emacs/2017/08/06/eyebrowse/). Not
much of a complaint, I know.

Magit brings order, balance and elegance to the powers of Git. It is the only
version-control system I need.
