---
layout:     post
title:      Every feed in its right place
date:       2017-08-01
summary:    Using `elfeed` as an RSS feed reader.
categories: emacs
---

Writing about Christopher Wellons’ [elfeed](https://github.com/skeeto/elfeed) is
the least I can do to describe how thankful I am for this gem, especially since
it’s one of the Emacs packages I use the most.

Up until last month, Twitter was useful to keep in touch with the IT and the
film criticism communities. However, for a while I had been finding myself in
dire need of a vacation from social media. The amount of time lost in pointless
time-line scrolling looking for the latest hip comment screamed to be spent
otherwise.

I have always been a fan of RSS feeds, because having the news aggregated in one
place spares me the time of wandering the Internet. Twitter fought against my
feeds, giving the impression it was offering more up-to-date content along with
the false promise of an interaction that in fact was rarely happening.

Before `elfeed`, I tried my luck with different feed readers. Since a carefully
*tmux-ed* terminal window is always part of my daily workflow, I fell in love
with [Newsbeuter](http://www.newsbeuter.org) a couple of years ago.

However, as any Emacs fanatic would tell you, why leave the comfort of your
favourite text editor for something as mundane as RSS feeds?

`elfeed` is more than a Newsbeuter replacement, though. Tags, filters and the
power of Emacs beneath its lean interface make feeds management easier than
ever. It’s also trivially extensible. Look at this simple trick to mark all the
feeds read when I am feeling too lazy.

``` emacs-lisp
(defun mu-elfeed-mark-all-read ()
  "Mark all feeds as read."
  (interactive)
  (call-interactively 'mark-whole-buffer)
  (elfeed-search-untag-all-unread))

(bind-key "R" #'mu-elfeed-mark-all-read elfeed-search-mode-map)
```

`elfeed` sorts feeds by time, with the most recent on top. This had been a bit
confusing at first, as I was used to having the feeds grouped by items with
Newsbeuter. Nevertheless, after a while this approach felt more natural, maybe
because it reminds me of the Twitter time-line.

RSS feeds are an essential tool in this age of perennial distractions. Having
them readily available at my fingertips is invaluable.
