---
layout:     post
title:      Refactoring power-ups
date:       2018-02-10
summary:    Fast editings with `counsel-projectile-rg` and `ivy-occur`.
categories: emacs
---

Any programmer knows the importance of refactoring. It’s even hard to believe a
programmer can live without it. There are plenty of use cases for refactoring,
but the following happens often enough that I am glad Emacs sits next to me
every day.

Imagine you are working on a medium-to-big size project. You have functions
everywhere, maybe constants here and there to make your life easier. Functional
programmers have no time for variables, so I won’t go down that road.

At one point you discover a function that could use a different name. Clarity,
readability, or just mere kindness towards your fellow co-workers prompts you to
come up with something better. Naturally, the function is used in many places
around the codebase, so it’s time to bring out the heavy guns.

There are plenty of ways to solve this problem, especially in Emacs, but this is
how I approach the situation:

- <kbd>C-c p s r</kbd> brings up `counsel-projectile-rg`
- If point is on the function name, I just hit <kbd>M-n</kbd> to use it as the
  search term, otherwise I type it in
- <kbd>C-c C-o</kbd> now runs `ivy-occur` and all the candidates end up in a
  dedicated buffer
- <kbd>C-x C-q</kbd>, bound to `ivy-wgrep-change-to-wgrep-mode`, makes the new
  buffer editable. It’s easy to remember because it’s the same key binding to
  enable
 [Wdired](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Wdired.html)
  from Dired
- <kbd>C-s</kbd> invokes `counsel-grep-or-swiper` and I type in the function
  name
- <kbd>M-q</kbd> takes me to `swiper-query-replace`, and I just need to enter
  the new function name, hit <kbd>RET</kbd> and then <kbd>C-c C-c</kbd> to
  confirm my modifications
- <kbd>C-x s</kbd> followed by <kbd>!</kbd> is all it takes now to save the
  files involved in my refactoring

If it looks like a lot to remember, well, it is. Only the first times,
though. After a while it becomes second nature, and editing an occurrence in
multiple files feels like a gentle breeze down your neck.

[Projectile](https://github.com/bbatsov/projectile) and
[Ivy/Counsel/Swiper](https://github.com/abo-abo/swiper) are really invaluable
tools.
