---
layout:     post
title:      The aesthetics of patching
date:       2019-12-01
summary:    Curing my OCD with `el-patch`.
categories: emacs
---

In describing [my move to
Helm](https://manuel-uberti.github.io/emacs/2019/11/16/helm/), I quickly
mentioned another package from Thierry Volpiatto:
[psession](https://github.com/thierryvolpiatto/psession). `psession` is a light
session saving mechanism and it comes with built-in integration for Helm among
other things, which of course renders it a valuable improvement to my setup. The
installation instructions are pretty clear, so there is no need to bother you
with obvious code snippets.

Instead, I want to bother you with my obsessive-compulsive disorder. You see,
I am fond of how my beloved text editor looks, especially after boot. I disabled
every message, toolbar, scrollbar, menu, and buffer Emacs can throw at me on
startup, and the theme is applied as late as possible to ensure nothing
obstructs my way to another great day of text editing.

What’s “wrong” with `psession` then? In order to make the previous sessions
available, `psession` loads some compiled files when Emacs starts. This is what
I expect it to do, because there would be no point in saving sessions without
restoring them. My only “problem” with this behaviour is the file loading
itself.

``` emacs-lisp
(cl-defun psession--restore-objects-from-directory
    (&optional (dir psession-elisp-objects-default-directory))
  (let ((file-list (directory-files dir t directory-files-no-dot-files-regexp)))
    (cl-loop for file in file-list do (and file (load file)))))
```

The code is not hard to understand. What constitutes a rude attack at my
delicate aesthetic feelings is that `(load file)` right before the good-looking
closing parentheses. Calling `load` in this manner causes a bunch of messages to
“interfere” with a clean Emacs boot: they show up in the echo area during the
loading of my `init.el` and they hurt so bad![^1]

Let’s examine the documentation of the function
[load](http://doc.endlessparentheses.com/Fun/load.html):

> load is a function defined in lread.c.
>
> **Signature**
>
> (load FILE &optional NOERROR NOMESSAGE NOSUFFIX MUST-SUFFIX)
>
> **Documentation**
>
> Execute a file of Lisp code named FILE.
>
> […]
>
> Print messages at start and end of loading unless
> optional third arg NOMESSAGE is non-nil (but force-load-messages
> overrides that).
>
> […]

Perfect. Now I just have to hack `psession--restore-objects-from-directory` and
make sure `load` is called with a non-nil value for `NOMESSAGE`. Usually when
I want to silence a command I rely on `inhibit-message`. Let’s say I want to
silence the activation of `helm-adaptive-mode`:

``` emacs-lisp
(let ((inhibit-message t))
  (helm-adaptive-mode +1))
```

However, `psession--restore-objects-from-directory` is sort of a private
function, so I need something else to change it according to my plans. There are
probably several good ways to patch `psession--restore-objects-from-directory`,
but my go-to package in these situations is Radon
Rosborough’s [el-patch](https://github.com/raxod502/el-patch).

``` emacs-lisp
(el-patch-feature psession)
(with-eval-after-load 'psession
  (el-patch-cl-defun psession--restore-objects-from-directory
    (&optional (dir psession-elisp-objects-default-directory))
    (let ((file-list (directory-files dir t directory-files-no-dot-files-regexp)))
      (cl-loop for file in file-list do (and file (load file nil 'nomessage))))))
```

Only six lines of code to please my sense of aesthetic. Beauty is always within
reach when we are dealing with Emacs.

Note that at the moment of this writing, `el-patch-cl-defun` is on the `develop`
branch of `el-patch`. See
[here](https://github.com/raxod502/el-patch/issues/39) to know more about this
and to laugh at my poor reading skills.

## Footnotes

[^1]: I know this is silly, but I hope the double quotation marks and the light
    tone make the irony clear enough. The point is having fun at hacking Emacs,
    not insulting Thierry.
