---
layout:     post
title:      The people’s conference
date:       2019-08-04
summary:    Back from Heart of Clojure.
categories: clojure
---

<div style="text-align: center">
    <figure>
        <img src="/images/hoc.png">
    </figure>
</div>

I have still to properly unpack my luggage and yet here I am, eager to make
sense of the enthusiasm of experiencing [Heart of
Clojure](https://heartofclojure.eu/). I tried my best to pin down on my diary
everything that the conference had to offer, because at first I wanted to write
a round-up similar to the one I did for [Dutch Clojure Days
2018](https://manuel-uberti.github.io/programming/2018/04/23/dcd-round-up/).
However, summarising Heart of Clojure seems like an unimaginative exercise. And
this is because a summary is by definition a cursory look. Considering what I’ve
had the pleasure to enjoy, it doesn’t feel right.

So, what was Heart of Clojure like exactly? After one day and a half in and
plenty more to do, I came up with a definition: the people’s conference.
Fragments of this definition were already floating around my head as soon as
I was in front of Hal5, the incredibly cosy space the Heart of Clojure team set
up as the main location for the event. It’s not easy to put it clearly into
words, but just take a look at the registration process. You reached a desk,
they gave you a badge, you picked the holder of the right colour for you (i.e.,
green meant you were fine appearing in pictures taken during the conference,
pink you were not), you were given pens and markers to write your name on the
badge and add whatever customisations you feel like adding to it. Now, go back
and count how many *you* and *they* there are in the last sentence, and you’ll
start getting an idea about the general approach of Heart of Clojure.

The more I think about it, the more I find the effort to make everything safe
and nice for the attendees remarkable, especially because it looked like nobody
was actually controlling anything. I wasn’t expecting surveillance cameras and
SWAT teams, of course, but the simple fact that the responsibility of looking
after everyone appeared invisible made for a peaceful environment. And you
always had kind and smiling Heart of Clojure’s staff members around ready to
help you out or have a chat with you. The results were in plain sight. Everybody
looked calm, serene, and even without asking you could tell they were having a
great time just being there.

Unsurprisingly, the wide range of topics in the program left me with an
impossible amount of thoughts. Teaching programmers to draw, Clojure in fashion,
empathy and resilience, inclusiveness and climate change, open source
sustainability and fragment shaders, compilers and arcade games. In a two-day
span, the selection of talks leveraged topics of such a pervasive power that it
was basically impossible not to constantly connect and be moved. With the
entertaining work of the hosts and unforgettable MCs [Saskia
Linder](http://www.saskialindner.com/) and [Bozhidar
Batsov](https://github.com/bbatsov) there was no such thing as boredom in the
air.

At the same time, though, I have to admit I was a bit sceptical about the extra
activities. Again, the Heart of Clojure’s masterminds put the people in charge,
and so anyone could devise an activity covering the spare time in the evenings,
during the long afternoon break on Saturday, or on Sunday morning. Before
leaving for Leuven, my overtly paranoid brain asked me: how could they trust
everybody like this? What if a too fervid attendee can’t manage it well?
Wouldn’t it spoil the fun for the rest of us? It turned out there was too much
joyfulness around to be paranoid, a well-deserved lesson for that silly brain of
mine. I will never be able to thank the awesome [Malwine](https://malweene.com)
enough for the sketchnote workshop, and I’ll have to find a way to be at another
of her workshops sooner or later.

Probably co-opted by the aforementioned brain, my mind wandered in similar
doubts when it came to the lightning talks, but in five minutes
[Connie](https://twitter.com/waffles193) silenced both my brain and my mind.
I think I’ve held my breath and stood still throughout her entire session,
struck in my seat by the genius of an eleven-year old’s crafts. More than
anything else, she was the heart at the Heart of Clojure.

I have to stop now, because it’s time to rest and see if I can soothe the
intense emotions of the past three days. Did I mention the couple of tears on
the [“My Heart Will Go On”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v0_FFJArOG0)
karaoke? You cannot play with a sentimental fool like this, people, there are
feelings at stake. Come on.

But before turning off the lights:

Thank you [Arne](https://github.com/plexus) and thank you
[Martin](https://github.com/martinklepsch): you conceived the impossible and
made it happen. Please make it happen again.

Thank you Heart of Clojure’s program committee and reviewers: Arne and Martin
couldn’t have made it without you.

Thank you [speakers](https://heartofclojure.eu/speakers): singling out one of
you would be unfair and completely pointless. You all inspired me, in one way or
the other.

Thank you Saskia: you taught me the beauty of reaching out, and I will treasure
the words on emotion management for a long while.

Thank you Bozhidar: no, not for just CIDER this time. For everything, including
the unparalleled dancing skills.

Thank you [Carlo](https://github.com/skuro),
[Davide](https://github.com/Heliosmaster), [Fabrizio](https://github.com/f-f),
and [Kleopatra](https://github.com/pirp): I’m still not sure of how you did it,
but you made me forget sociability is an issue for me. For a while, at least.

Thank you [Marco](https://github.com/mdallastella) and thank you
[7bridges](https://7bridges.eu/): I just couldn’t have managed it by myself.

Thank you James Cameron: yes, I still cry with that film, why are you doing this
to me?
