---
layout:     post
title:      The end of an era?
date:       2020-09-08
summary:    Feeling good with my Emacs configuration.
categories: emacs
---

Yesterday I noticed it has been a while since I wrote something here. I can
easily blame the lack of time and concentration, point the finger at my cinema
obsession, or even rant against Plato and Hegel for the energy-draining efforts
they require from me. Or I can simply be honest and say the truth out loud: my
journey with Emacs has come to a halt. Before calling me names and put the GNU
police on my back, hear me out.

After years on a constant tinkering diet, my configuration has reached a point
where everything I need from it is covered. The key word in the previous
statement is *everything*. What is this *everything* I use Emacs for? Well, contrary
to the popular Emacs-centric workflows of many fellow Elisp lovers, *everything*
is just prose (Markdown, LaTeX) and Clojure programming with some Elisp on the
side. What happens outside of my beloved text editor is up to Firefox,
Thunderbird, GNOME Terminal on some occasions, Slack for work and Gajim for
personal use, and KeePassXC. 99% of the times this is what my computing is about
these days.

Although Emacs can be used for some of the things the afore-mentioned external
programs do, I am fine with this setup for a couple of reasons. 

Firstly, I like to keep my configuration as simple as possible. It used to sport
over 200 packages, but refinement after refinement has taken me to half that
number. It’s even a smaller total if I don’t count the package dependencies for
which there is no `use-package` snippet in my `init.el`. I am still far from
minimalism but maintenance is much easier now, because I know what I want from
Emacs and I want it to do just that.

Secondly, but maybe more importantly, I don’t want any kind of distraction in my
text editor. This may be just me, but most of the times the Web, reading emails,
and messaging interfere with my concentration without adding real value. Emacs
is my peace of mind. I turn to it just for writing, knowing well it is not ready
to fetch emails or chatting with my wife or a co-worker because that’s how it is
set up. There is no technological secret here. It’s all about the psychological
pleasure of a maximized Emacs window with little more than my precious text in
it.

This line of reasoning has led me to an Emacs configuration that does not
require that much fiddling with any more. I have to admit that not seeing
buffers from my `.emacs.d` always presented by `helm-mini` feels a bit strange. At
the same time, though, I am sure they will pop up again as soon as the next
irresistible package will reach ELPA or MELPA. Until then, Elisp can go on a
well-deserved holiday and have a couple of drinks on me.
