---
layout: post
title: Quick starting is a bendy road
date: 2021-03-08
summary: Using `package-quickstart`.
categories: emacs
---

After more than a year with [straight](https://www.manueluberti.eu/emacs/2019/10/04/straight/) as my package manager, recently I have
decided to sit down and look closely at how I handle my Emacs packages.

For all the interesting design choices and splendid documentation `straight`
offers, I have never used neither its version freezing capabilities nor the
chances to edit the source code of a package to try possible fixes before
sending patches upstream. Two reasons, mainly:

- I update my packages on a daily basis, accepting the risk of breakages in
  order to signal them to the maintainers and offer some help;
- when I want to send a patch, I have the source code of the package I am
  working on outside of my Emacs configuration to avoid leaving something messy
  around.
  
These are not issues with `straight`, of course. It all depends on what one needs
from their package manager. 

One of the major benefits that `straight` brought to my setup is a boost in
startup speed. However, why don’t give `package-quickstart` a try? Setting
`package-quickstart` to `t` instructs `package.el` to pre-compute an autoload
file so that the activation of packages can be done much faster, resulting in a
faster startup[^1]. And indeed it does, resulting in more or less the same 0.4
seconds that I was getting with `straight`.

One thing to be aware of is that, as the documention of `package-quickstart`
suggests, “the use of ‘package-quickstart-refresh’ every time the activation
need to be changed, such as when ‘package-load-list’ is modified” is required.
Hence, I added an `:after-while` advice to `package-menu-execute` (bound to
<kbd>x</kbd> in `Package Menu`) to make sure `package-quickstart-refresh` is run
after every upgrade.

Again, mine is not an argument against `straight`. It’s still a great package
manager and a fantastic alternative to the built-in `package.el`. However, these
days my Emacs interactions do not need the fine-grained control `straight`
provides.

## Notes

[^1]: See the [relevant commit](https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/emacs.git/commit/etc/NEWS?id=6dfdf0c9e8e4aca77b148db8d009c862389c64d3).
